Lesson 1: ADD AND SUBTRACT WITHIN 10 2.1.1 Teacher Guide

Narrative:
Students develop fluency with addition and subtraction within 10 in grade 1. This lesson provides an opportunity for formative assessment of students’ fluency within 10, including recognizing sums with a value of 10. Throughout the lesson, monitor for the ways students find the values of sums and differences and how they describe their methods to others. There may be sums and differences students say they “just know.” In this case, do not require students to explain how they got their answer every time, and take note of the expressions that many students already know from memory. Counters or connecting cubes should be made available for students to use, encourage students to use them only if they need them.

Procedure:
Number Cards 0–10 :  Activity 1  Chart paper: Lesson Synthesis  Markers: Lesson Synthesis     Warm-up: What Do You Know About Math? (15 minutes)
The purpose of this activity is to elicit ideas students have about doing math. This is the first time students experience the  What Do You Know About _____?  routine in grade 2. Students are familiar with this routine from a previous grade, however, they may benefit from a brief review of the steps involved. For all of the routines, consider establishing a small, discreet hand signal that students can display to indicate they have an answer they can support with reasoning. This signal could be a thumbs-up, a certain number of fingers that tells the number of responses they have, or another subtle signal. This is a quick way to see if students have had enough time to think about the problem. It also keeps students from being distracted or rushed by hands being raised around the class. Since this is the first Warm-up of the year, 15 minutes is allocated, instead of 10, to establish the structure of a routine.     Activity 1: Check It Off: Add or Subtract within 10 (20 minutes)
The purpose of this activity is for students to demonstrate methods they have for addition and subtraction within 10. In this activity, students draw 2 cards and consider how they could add or subtract the numbers to create a value that matches one of the target numbers (0–10). Listen for the ways students think about how to find the value of sums and differences, including any sums and differences they know from memory, and how they share their thinking with their partner. If students disagree about the value of a sum or difference, encourage them to discuss their reasoning and reach an agreement. Students may write subtraction expressions that do not match their computation. For example, students write 2−4 instead of 4−2. Ask students to use counters or cubes to represent the subtraction. Highlight that they started with 4 and took away 2 and ask them to connect this action to the expression. To stay mathematically consistent with what students will learn in later grades about operations with rational numbers, avoid language that suggests students can only subtract a smaller number from a larger number.    Access for Students with Diverse Abilities:   Representation: Access for Perception.  Some students may benefit from a demonstration of how to play the game using the available connecting cubes or counters.  Supports accessibility for: Conceptual Processing, Visual-Spatial Processing    Access for Multilingual Learners:   MLR8 Discussion Supports.  Provide all students with an opportunity for verbal output. Invite students to read each expression they create to their partner. Amplify words and phrases such as: add, addition, sum, take away, difference, value, and expression.  Advances: Speaking, Listening, Representing       Activity 2: What’s the Value? (10 minutes)
The purpose of the activity is for students to practice finding the value of sums and differences within 10. Students also identify addition expressions that have a value of 10. Students will work more with sums of 10 in the next lesson. This activity provides an opportunity to observe how students find sums and differences within 10, including those they know from memory.
